![A cartoon of two people holding a wand Description automatically
generated](media/image1.jpeg){width="4.166666666666667in"
height="2.7777777777777777in"}

# **2. The Ecological Hypotheses**

The sex/recombination (\"sex/rec\") anomaly has attracted some of the
best theoretical biologists over the last 50 years, leading to at least
two dozen hypotheses to explain selection for recombination and/or the
persistence of obligate sexual reproduction in natural populations
(Kondrashov 1993). In what follows, I first focus on the ecological
hypotheses. The ideas underlying these hypotheses provide a handle for
understanding some of the foundational concepts in evolutionary ecology.

## 2.1 The Lottery Model

As part of his book on the evolution of sex, Williams (1975) suggested
that sex could be favored in fluctuating abiotic environments. The idea
is intuitive: cross-fertilization generates variation among offspring.
Hence, in fluctuating environments, sex could increase the probability
that some offspring might survive. Williams likened the idea to a unique
kind of lottery. For example, he wrote (p. 15):

> *Suppose you were offered this choice in a lottery: either you could
> have several different tickets, or you could have the same number of
> copies of the same ticket.*

If you choose *N* copies of the same ticket (asex), and your ticket
wins, you get *N* times the reward. If you choose *N* different tickets
(sex), you increase the probability of winning something, but the reward
is smaller. Williams referred to the idea as the aphid-rotifer model,
but the idea has since come to be known as the Lottery Model (following
Bell 1982)[^1], which is a more descriptive phrase.

In my evolution course, I ask a form of Williams\' question, but with a
slight twist:

> If you had a garden, upon which your descendants will depend for many
> generations to come, would you
>
> 1\. plant a genetically variable crop, or
>
> 2\. a monoculture with a two-fold higher yield?
>
> Keep in mind that your descendants will follow your choice.

Often the students rightfully want some clarification. They ask, for
example, "Can we use pesticides?" But every time, most students choose
the variable crop. I remind them that selecting the variable crop will
reduce their yield by one half. They don\'t budge. I re-ask the
question, doubling the relative yield for the monoculture from two-fold
to four-fold. Then to 10-fold. Occasionally, one of the more risk-prone
students will select the 10-fold higher yield, but most do not budge.
They want genetic variation. I ask them why. Invariably, they say that
the environment is going to change. They want to hedge their bets
against an uncertain future.

Indeed, Williams\' Lottery Model is about bet hedging. The gist of
bet-hedging in evolutionary theory is that selection can act to reduce
the variance in reproductive success over time, even if it also reduces
the arithmetic mean across years (review in Philippi and Seger 1989).
Suppose, for example, that we have the following data for both a
monoculture and a genetically variable polyculture (in arbitrary units).
Let's assume that the variation in yield is driven by annual variation
in abiotic factors, such as temperature or precipitation. The effect of
planting a polyculture (bet-hedging) can be estimated from the geometric
mean, which incorporates the variation in yield over time.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Year**                            **Monoculture**    **Polyculture**
  ----------------------------- ----- ------------------ ------------------
  1                                   350                250

  2                                   400                250

  3                                   300                200

  4                                   100                200

  5                                   50                 200

                                                         

  **Arithmetic mean**                 **240**            220

  **Variance**[^2]                    19400              600

  **Geometric mean (GM)**[^3]         184                **219**

  **Approximate GM**                  200                **219**
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this example, we find that the monoculture has an arithmetic mean of
240, while the polyculture has an arithmetic mean of only 220. So, I
might be inclined to plant the monoculture. However, the among-year
variance is very high for the monoculture (relative to the polyculture),
driven in large part by the low yields in years 4 and 5. By contrast,
the geometric mean for the monoculture is 184, while the geometric mean
for the polyculture is 219. Based on this, I might be inclined to plant
the polyculture, as it reduces the cost of very low yield in bad years.
I think the students see this intuitively. Over the long term, it is
better to be risk-averse and plant the genetically variable polyculture.
What if, for example, the monoculture produced no food in the last year?
The geometric mean would be zero. That would be catastrophic.

The effect of variance on the geometric mean (GM) can be seen by an
approximation (Stearns 2000):

$$\text{GM} \approx \overline{x} - \frac{\text{var}(x)}{2\overline{x}}$$

where $\overline{x}$ is the mean, and var($x$) is the variance in $x$.
Note that the approximation is equal to the arithmetic mean when the
variance in $x$ is zero. Note too that the geometric mean increases as
the variance in $x\ $decreases. So, if selection operates to reduce the
among-year variance in fitness, the outcome of selection will be
reflected by an increase in the geometric mean. In general, evolutionary
biologists use the geometric mean (rather than the arithmetic mean) to
measure fitness over time[^4].

Can sex be favored in variable environments as a bet-hedging strategy?
It seems like a very sensible idea, provided that the production of
genetically variable progeny reduces the among-year variance in
offspring survival. But remember, that under a two-fold cost of sex,
asexuals can replace large populations of sexuals in tens of generations
(see chapter 1). So, if the Lottery Model is correct, significant
environmental change must occur very rapidly. The many thousands of
years between ice ages, for example, would be too long.

## 2.1 The Tangled Bank/Frozen Niche-Variation Model

Roughly speaking, the Lottery Model concerns the value of producing
diverse offspring in a temporally variable abiotic environment. A
different kind of model instead concerns the role of competition for
different resource types that vary in space. Let us first consider the
Frozen Niche-Variation Hypothesis of Robert Vrijenhoek. The key idea is
that the clonal derivatives of sexual ancestors \"freeze\" some of the
genetic variation in the sexual population. This frozen genotype then
determines the resource niche of the clone. It seems reasonable to
assume that the niche width of a single clone would be relatively narrow
compared to the niche width of the genetically diverse sexual
population. So, under this idea, a clone could invade a sexual
population, and perhaps displace it from one of its many niches. But a
single clone could not completely replace the sexual population
(Vrijenhoek 1979). This kind of process could explain those situations
in which sexual and asexual females coexist[^5], which was a major
advance.

A conceptually similar model was independently developed by Graham Bell:
the Tangled Bank Hypothesis (Bell 1982). Bell nabbed the name from the
last paragraph of the *Origin of Species*, in which Darwin imagines life
as an \"entangled bank\" of species interacting in a complex network.
The core of the idea can be traced back to Howard Levene\'s (1953)
pioneering model, which showed that polymorphism could be maintained in
a spatially heterogeneous environment provided that different genotypes
specialize on different resources. Levene\'s model was a major advance,
as it showed that genetic diversity could be maintained without
heterozygote advantage (Box 2.1). This was also one of the first models
to fuse population genetics with ecology. But how does multiple niche
polymorphism apply to sex? The idea is that, if selection results in
polymorphism, then a genetically diverse sexual population might be
resistant to replacement by a clonal lineage that specializes on only
one of the available resource types (as also in the Frozen
Niche-Variation Model).

Here is how I pose the Tangled Bank idea to my undergraduate students. I
start by giving them a choice between two hypothetical resources, which
occur in different parts of the room. One is pizza, the other is
broccoli. They all choose pizza. The problem, of course, is that the
per-person value of the pizza resource declines as the pizza-eating
population grows. At some point, there will be an advantage to
specializing on broccoli. This could lead to a polymorphic population
composed of obligate pizza eaters and obligate broccoli eaters, where
(at equilibrium) the value of both resources is the same. Hence,
selection for or against a particular strategy depends on the frequency
of that strategy in the population. Perhaps this kind of
*frequency-dependent selection* could favor sexual reproduction as a way
to diversify offspring in environments where different resource types
are patchily distributed in space. This reasoning forms the essence of
the Tangled Bank Hypothesis.






Two caveats are worth mentioning with respect to soft selection and the
Tangled Bank Hypothesis. One is that polymorphism is only stable under a
narrow range of patch-types frequencies. In addition, strong tradeoffs
are required for the cost and benefits for morphs occupying different
patches (Maynard Smith and Hoekstra 1980, Lively 1986a) (see also Box
3.1). The second caveat is that repeated mutation to asexual
reproduction could lead to the accumulation of clonal diversity over
time. Once all the niches are occupied by different specialized clones,
there would be no advantage to sex. A diverse clonal population could
then replace the sexual population (Bell 1982, Vrijenhoek and Parker
2009). This second caveat applies, in general, to any model of sex that
relies on frequency-dependent selection. But the ideas could work if
mutations to asex are rare. And, as I mentioned, sexuals and asexuals
are known to coexist in some populations, which is consistent with the
Tangled Bank and Frozen Niche-Variation Hypotheses (Vrijenhoek and
Parker 2009). Coexistence, however, is also compatible with the Red
Queen hypothesis, which we will now consider.

## 2.3 The Red Queen Hypothesis

The Red Queen Hypothesis is similar to the Lottery Model, in that it
focusses on environmental change over time. However, under the Red Queen
idea, the change is mediated by changes in coevolving biological
antagonists such as parasites[^8], rather than changes in the abiotic
environments. The distinction is important, as we will see.

It may be helpful to revisit figure 1.2, which shows the replacement of
a sexual population by a clonal lineage within 25 generations. In this
example, the clone was a single genotype, while the sexual population
was composed of multiple recombining genotypes, only one of which was
shared with the clone. Clearly, as the clone spreads, its genotype would
become the most common in the host population. Now suppose that the host
population is coevolving with a parasite population, which is composed
of multiple strains. Assuming random contact between hosts and
parasites, the parasite strain that could infect the most common host
genotype would have a selective advantage over parasite strains that
could only infect rare host genotypes. Let\'s call this more successful
parasite strain \"strain **A**.\" What would happen? It should be easy
to see that strain **A** would increase in frequency. The parasite
population would evolve.

Now, what if the parasite dramatically reduces the reproductive success
of infected hosts? We might expect that, as the parasite evolves to
infect the most-common host genotype, the reproductive advantage of the
host clone is eroded. Moreover, if the parasite is *common and
sufficiently virulent*, evolution by the parasite could prevent the
clone from eliminating the sexual population. Under this scenario, there
are at least two possible outcomes. One is that the sexuals and asexuals
come to exist in stable frequencies, where the lost fecundity of the
clone due to infection is equal to the cost of males, meaning that the
mean fitnesses of sexuals and asexuals are equal. On the other hand, if
the parasite is highly virulent, the frequencies of sexuals and asexuals
can oscillate over time (Fig. 2.2A). Under this second scenario, the new
clone initially increases, but it is driven down sharply by infection
(Fig. 2.2B). Then, once the clone becomes very rare, it should become
less infected than observed in the sexual population (Fig. 2.2B). During
this period, there is parasite-mediated selection *against* sex. Hence,
the clone increases in frequency (Fig 2.2A), only to be driven down
again by parasites after it becomes common (Fig. 2.2B). Another cycle
begins. **The key point is that parasites do not select against clonal
reproduction per se; they only select against common genotypes**. But
selection against common host genotypes might be sufficient to prevent
fixation of a clone in the short term.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![A graph of a number and number of signals Description    Fig. 2.2. Simulation
  automatically                                              model showing that
  generated](media/image3.JPG){width="4.013207567804025in"   coevolving parasites can
  height="5.2420374015748035in"}                             prevent the fixation of
                                                             asexuals in the short
                                                             term. **A**. The number
                                                             of sexual and asexual
                                                             individuals over time.
                                                             **B**. The frequency of
                                                             infection in sexual and
                                                             asexual individuals over
                                                             time. The simulation
                                                             introduces a single
                                                             clonal genotype into a
                                                             sexual population at
                                                             carrying capacity. After
                                                             the clone becomes common
                                                             (**A**) the parasites
                                                             evolve to \"target\" it
                                                             for infection (**B**).
                                                             Note that after the
                                                             parasites have driven the
                                                             clone\'s frequency down,
                                                             the asexuals are less
                                                             infected than the
                                                             sexuals. Simulation model
                                                             based on Lively (2009),
                                                             which treats parasite
                                                             virulence as a positive
                                                             function of host density.
  ---------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This scenario of fluctuating selection for and against sex is just a
special case of the more general idea that parasites will select against
common genotypes within a diverse, sexual host population. As a rare
host genotype becomes common, the parasites genotype that can infect it
will be favored by natural selection. If the parasite is virulent
(meaning that infection reduces host fitness), the targeted host
genotype will decline in frequency, and a new host genotype will begin
to increase in frequency. Under this logic, host-parasite coevolution
will lead to the oscillation of genotypes in both the host and the
parasite populations (Fig. 2.3). These oscillations are now called Red
Queen dynamics. Red Queen dynamics can lead to the maintenance of
genetic polymorphism in sexual populations, and possibly protect sexual
reproduction from replacement by asexual lineages. In addition, Red
Queen dynamics could also favor recombination within a sexual population
(Peters and Lively 1999, Schmid-Hempel and jokela 2002, Peters and
Lively 2007, Salathe et al. 2008). These related ideas are now called
the Red Queen Hypothesis (following Bell 1982).

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![A graph showing the difference between the generation and Fig. 2.3. Red Queen
  the generation Description automatically generated with     dynamics. The frequency
  medium                                                      of a single host genotype
  confidence](media/image4.JPG){width="4.060439632545932in"   is shown along with the
  height="2.6032797462817148in"}                              frequency of the only
                                                              parasite genotype that
                                                              can infect it. Note that
                                                              the parasite tracks the
                                                              host with a time lag.
                                                              Results were extracted
                                                              from a simulation of a
                                                              sexual host population
                                                              with nine possible
                                                              genotypes coevolving with
                                                              an asexual parasite with
                                                              nine matching genotypes
                                                              Lively (2009). The dashed
                                                              line shows the average
                                                              genotype frequency for
                                                              hosts and parasites.
  ----------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### **2.3.1 An intersection of science and literature**

The name for the Red Queen Hypothesis comes from *Through the Looking
Glass* (Carroll 1872). Here are the relevant bits of the story. After
Alice goes through the looking glass (a mirror), she decides to follow a
straight path to the top of a hill. But, in following the path, she ends
up at her starting point. Talking to herself, she remarks, \"*But how
curiously it twists! It\'s more like a corkscrew than a path.*\"
Repeated attempts were unsuccessful. In frustration, Alice addresses a
tiger lily amongst a patch of flowers, \"*I wish you could talk!\"* The
lily informs Alice that all the flowers can talk. The stunned Alice then
begins a conversation with the flowers before finally asking, *Are there
more people in the garden besides me?* The rose answers yes, there is
someone like you. Alice sets out to follow this person (the Red Queen),
but she quickly loses sight of her, and ends up back at her original
starting point. Flustered, Alice decides to follow the advice of the
rose: \"I should advise you to walk the other way.\" Alice then quickly
finds the Red Queen.

Now it gets especially interesting. Alice mentions to the Red Queen that
she would like to \"*find my way to the top of the hill*.\" The Red
Queen replies: *\"I could show you hills in comparison with which you\'d
call that a valley.\"* Alice protests: \"*a hill ca\'n\'t be a
valley\... That would be nonsense.*\" This exchange between Alice and
the Red Queen now seems prophetic, because, under frequency-dependent
selection, locations on the adaptive landscape can rapidly change from
fitness peaks to fitness valleys. Perhaps the Red Queen\'s statement is
correct: hills can become valleys, and valleys can become hills. More
specifically, genotypes that were favored by natural selection when rare
can become selected against after they become common, leading to a
highly dynamic adaptive landscape.

In any case, Alice had clearly entered a crazy world. Straight paths
become like corkscrews, progress is made by going the other way, and
hills become valleys. Then, suddenly, Alice and the Red Queen began to
run.

> *Alice never could quite make out, in thinking afterwards how it was
> that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand in
> hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep
> up with her.*

During this furious run, Alice notices that they never pass anything.
The trees remain in the same place as if they were moving along with
them. Alice eventually asks: *\"Are we nearly there?\"* The Red Queen
replies: *\"Why, we passed it ten minutes ago! Faster!*

When they finally stop, Alice is surprised to be where they started:
*\"I do believe we have been under this tree the whole time!\"*
*Everything is just as it was!* The Red Queen replies that of course,
and then asks: *\"What would you have it?\"* Alice replies that she
would have expected to get somewhere else after running for a long time.
The Red Queen then replies with this very famous quote:

> *\"Now, [here]{.underline}, you see, it takes all the running
> [you]{.underline} can do to keep in the same place\".*



### **2.3.2 Conceptual roots of the Red Queen Hypothesis** 

Part of my goal is to show science as a process. As such it seems
reasonable to discuss the origins of the Red Queen idea. One of the
earliest statements alluding to the Red Queen Hypothesis came from W.D.
Hamilton (1975). Hamilton was reviewing the books by Williams (1975) and
Ghiselin (1974) for the Quarterly Review of Biology. Throughout the
review, the reader can feel Hamilton\'s frustration with their
arguments. Towards the end, he makes this very abstract suggestion:

> *"...it seems to me that we need environmental fluctuations around a
> trend line of change." "For the source of these we may look to
> fluctuations and periodicities ... generated by life itself."*

The quote does not specifically refer to parasites, but it does suggest
that coevolutionary interactions, in general, could play a role in
selecting for sex and recombination. In his memoirs, Hamilton (Hamilton
2001) clears this up, writing:

> *At that stage when I wrote the review, although I had not seen the
> particular relevance that parasitism might have, I had for many years
> seen sex looming ahead and had reached a stage of being excited by the
> possible primary role of biotic interaction. I had decided that it was
> in aspects of the interspecies struggle, and not survival in an
> inanimate environment, that I had to search for the main factor.
> Adaptation to new physical habitats might be made possible through
> sexuality but these adaptations could not be the main reason for its
> existence.*

Note that, here, Hamilton is specifically contrasting host-parasite
coevolution with the Lottery Model, which relies on random changes in
\"physical habitats.\"

At about the same time, a plant population biologist, Don Levin, was
also writing on the paradox of sex/rec. In his paper, Levin specifically
identified pathogens as a possible force selecting for recombination
(Levin 1975).

> *\"I propose that the persistent tracking of plant hosts by multiple
> pathogens and herbivores is a prime factor which prohibits the
> congealing of the genomes of species, especially those in closed
> communities.\"*

Boom! By \"prohibit the congealing of genomes\" Levin means \"selects
for recombination.\" The reference to \"closed communities\" means
species that are tightly coevolving in the absence of homogenizing gene
flow. This quote seems to be the first to specifically identify
coevolving pathogens as a primary source of selection favoring the
mixing of genomes. Levin\'s idea was quickly followed by important
conceptual contributions by Glesener & Tilman[^12] (1978), Jaenike[^13]
(Jaenike 1978), and Lloyd (1980). In particular, Lloyd writes:

> *"... biological interactions are more likely than unpredictable
> physical conditions to provide the kind of relentless, repetitive
> change that is necessary for sexual parents to be selected because of
> the genetic diversity that sex engenders."*

Lloyd then turns this abstract idea into a specific prediction, which I
would later test:

> *"If this proves to be so, we will then be able to examine whether the
> occurrence of asexual reproduction is correlated with relaxation of
> the biological hostility of the environment."*

Notice that, in the quotes presented above, both Hamilton and Lloyd were
specifically predicting that coevolution is more important in selecting
for sex than uncertain physical environments. But it is reasonable to
ask, does it really matter? Aren\'t both ideas fundamentally about bet
hedging in uncertain environments? Yes: I think both ideas are about bet
hedging. But the distinction still matters. The Lottery Model is about
random shifts in the direction of selection; there is no selection
against common genotypes, unless the environment changes by chance in a
way that disfavors them. By contrast, under the Red Queen, selection is
frequency dependent. In fact, selection against common genotypes is the
core of the model. Hence, the critical difference between the models is
not so much about bet hedging, but whether selection for sex/rec is
directional (but randomly changing directions, a lottery) or frequency
dependent (Red Queen). For example, parasites could be a source of
directional selection for sex, if they randomly changed which host
genotypes they attacked. To my mind, that would be a Lottery Model. The
Red Queen Hypothesis requires frequency-dependent selection[^14]
generated by interactions between species. This is an important
distinction.

Taking this view, the Red Queen Hypothesis may seem more closely related
to the Tangled Bank model than to the Lottery Model, as both the Red
Queen and the Tangled Bank rely on frequency-dependent selection. But
the critical distinction here is that selection against common genotypes
under the Tangled Bank relies on intraspecific competition in
populations at carrying capacity (soft selection). The Red Queen relies
on interspecific antagonistic coevolution, leading to parasite-mediated
selection against common host genotypes[^15].

In any case, looking back, it seems clear that the architects of the
ecological hypotheses had two inter-related things in mind: 1) how can
we explain sex/rec, and 2) how do we understand the biogeographic and
phylogenetic distributions of asexual reproduction? As an evolutionary
ecologist, I was drawn to the confluence of these questions. But other
ideas were also interesting, such as the idea that sexual reproduction
is favored because it reduces the interference between alleles at
different loci (review in Otto 2021). I will cover some special cases of
this latter idea[^16] in chapter 6.

## 2.4 Summary

1\. Three ecological hypotheses have been proposed to explain the
persistence of cross-fertilization in the face of competition with
uniparental reproductive strategies such as parthenogenesis or
self-fertilization (following Bell 1982).

2\. The Lottery Model is based on the possible advantages of
diversifying offspring facing uncertain changes in the abiotic
environment. Here selection is independent of both density and
frequency.

3\. The Tangled Bank and Frozen Niche-Variation Hypotheses are based on
competition for resources when multiple resource types co-occur.
Selection is frequency dependent, but the advantage to rare types only
occurs when intraspecific competition is intense.

4\. The Red Queen Hypothesis relies on parasite-mediated selection
against common host genotypes. Such selection, when strong, can result
in oscillatory changes in parasite and host alleles. These oscillations
are sometimes called Red Queen dynamics.

5\. A bet-hedging strategy reduces the variance in reproductive success
over time, even if it reduces the arithmetic mean. Sexual reproduction
under the Lottery Model is clearly a bet-hedging strategy. The Red Queen
idea can perhaps also be seen as bet hedging.




[^1]: See Bell (1982) for a deeper historical view of the Lottery Model,
    which involves contributions by Maynard Smith and others, including
    Williams. I have tried to distill it down to a simple bet-hedging
    model here. The original formulation is more complex.

[^2]: The variance in $x$ is equal to the average of the squared
    deviations from the mean:
    $var(x) = \frac{1}{N}\sum_{i = 1}^{N}{(x_{i} - \overline{x})^{2}}$

[^3]: The geometric mean is the $N^{th}$ root of the product of *N*
    observations. Compared to the arithmetic mean, the geometric mean
    gives more weight to small values.

[^4]: The bet-hedging idea dates to Daniel Bernoulli, a mathematical
    physicist, writing in 1738. Steve Stearns (2000) provides an
    important, fascinating review of how evolutionary biologists
    \[beginning with Cohen (1966)\], and economists, have borrowed from
    Bernoulli\'s conceptual framework.










[^12]: For example, Glesener and Tilman wrote: *Thus, sexuality not only
    is favored under changed conditions but is, itself, capable of
    changing the conditions. The sexuality of an organism\'s
    competitors, predators, parasites, etc., will greatly increase the
    selective pressure for sexuality on that organism as well.*

[^13]: Jaenike focused more on the recycling of genotypes: *My
    hypothesis differs from Levin\'s in that sex and recombination are
    advantageous not to produce novel genotypes as such, but to produce
    rare genotypes, of which novel ones are only a subset."*

[^14]: I use "frequency-dependent" selection here to mean selection
    against common genotypes. A more accurate phrase would be "negative
    frequency-dependent" selection.

[^15]: This is not meant to imply, however, that the strength of
    parasite-mediated selection under the Red Queen Hypothesis must be
    independent of population size. Indeed, as we will see, there are
    good reasons to think that the strength of parasite-mediated
    selection depends on host density.

[^16]: The basic idea comes from a paper by Hill and Robertson (1966),
    and is often called the Hill-Robertson effect (following Felsenstein
    1974). A broader framework, housed under the more intuitive phrase
    "selective interference," was recently given by Sarah Otto as part
    of a keynote lecture given to the American Genetic Association (Otto
    2021).
